(projector hums)
(reel clicks)
- [Marcus] "Westworld"
has had a decades-long
history in pop culture.
Between the "Westworld" show
and a "Westworld" movie,
this sci-fi western franchise
has a length history.
Too bad it's about as scrambled
as Bernard's leaky brain.
So, in preparation for
"Westworld" season 3,
we're unraveling the maze that
is the "Westworld" timeline.
Though the show hasn't
divulged the exact years
it takes place, there are some hints.
A video on the tie-in website
featured a 2052 watermark,
while a recent season 3
trailer included the year 2058
in relation to some big, unnamed event.
So, until we get some answers,
these dates are gonna have about
a six year margin of error.
But trust us, you'll want this to be
as simplified as possible.
2015 to 2018, two ambitious technicians,
Arnold Weber and Robert
Frost, spend three years
engineering highly-advanced
AI units known as hosts.
Their goal is to one day use these hosts
in a completely immersive world.
Once the hosts pass the Turing test,
they're ready to hit the market.
Weber and Ford put on a demonstration
using Angela and Akecheta
to woo Logan Delos,
the son of James Delos, the founder
of the massive Delos Corporation.
Logan sees all the dirty, dirty potential
in these realistic
non-humans, so, he invests.
With funding from the Delos Corporation,
Arnold and Ford create Westworld,
also known as the park.
Based out of an island
somewhere near China,
it's a place where real
humans can experience
their wildest, western-est
fantasies, for a price of course.
Among the preliminary
host units is Dolores,
who Arnold grows particularly fond of.
Her sense of splendor reminds
him of his son, Charlie,
but not really a
comparison you want to make
before subjecting someone
to a lawless world
of sex and murder.
After his son falls ill and passes away,
Arnold falls into a deep depression.
He takes solace in his
creations and tries to elevate
Dolores to the next level of intelligence,
true bicameral consciousness.
To that end, he has
one-on-one meetings with her
and also develops the reveries code,
allowing the hosts to recall
their latent memories.
Arnold hopes that this
will be the foundation
for the pyramid of consciousness,
although he revises that theory,
since consciousness is
really more like a maze.
Once Dolores successfully
traverses her maze,
Arnold determines that they
can no longer open the park.
It would be immoral to
allow truly living organisms
to face that kind of depravity.
But there's no stopping this train now,
at least, not peacefully.
In an attempt to nip
Westworld's violent delights
in the bud, Arnold imbues Dolores
with the villainous persona of Wyatt,
an outlaw from a different narrative.
It sends her on a killing
spree, first, the other hosts,
then Arnold, then herself.
The little town of Escalante
is marked by the massacre,
becoming the very center
of Dolores' new maze.
When Akecheta hears the
gunshots from his village
outside town, he leaves his wife Kohana,
and investigates the site.
He finds Arnold's literal
toy maze in the bar in town
and realizes that it has a deeper meaning.
Akecheta is intrigued, but
the technicians just figure
there's something wrong with him,
so they reformat him
into the violent leader
of Ghost Nation,
Westworld's kind of racist
Native American villains.
Ford sweeps that whole massacre
business under the rug,
and decides to open the park anyway.
Welcome to "Westworld."
2020 to 2025, after
repeated, debaucherous visits
to the park, Logan Delos brings
his soon-to-be brother-in-law, William.
William is engaged to
Logan's sister, Juliet,
so Logan wants him to see the investment
that's so important to the family company.
Logan plays as a black hat,
basically Westworld's
equivalent of a bad guy.
He likes drinking,
fighting, and infidelity.
On the other hand, Will thinks
of himself as a good guy,
white knight sort of figure.
So, when reborn farm girl
Dolores stumbles off track
and bumps into the two of them,
William decides to help her.
Throughout his time in the park,
he falls in love with Dolores.
They follow her innate memories
and retrace her steps to Escalante,
where Dolores melts down.
She remembers the massacre,
but doesn't know what
it means to remember.
Logan, for one, has had
enough of this crap.
In his mind, Westworld is a game.
It's not this complex
moral proving ground.
Plus, William's engaged to his sister.
So, Logan guts Dolores in front of William
to stop the madness.
Shaken by the incident, William goes
on a host-slaughtering spree,
until he crosses paths with
reborn Dolores once again.
Now, her memories and
feelings for him are gone.
He was bad before,
but this causes William
to completely snap.
He also loses the photograph
of Juliet in the park,
so hopefully someone in
Westworld's QA finds that
before it causes any trouble.
To discredit Logan, and
get a little revenge on him
for being a jerk, William strips him naked
and sends him out into
the park on a horse.
Akecheta later finds Logan,
sunburned and delusional,
rambling about how wrong the world is
and asking for the door home.
But Logan's nonsense reminds Akecheta
that this world is, in fact, wrong.
Later, William returns to
Westworld with James Delos,
Logan and Juliet's father.
He convinces James that Westworld is more
than just an R-rated Disneyland.
It's the perfect place
to study, and exploit,
the human condition in ways that
AdSense could only dream of.
So, Delos funnels more
money into the park,
playing right into William's dirty hands.
Though William goes on to marry Juliet,
and even has a daughter named Emily,
unfortunately, he has
been forever corrupted.
He's no longer William.
He is now the Man in Black.
Also, going off that season
3 marketing material,
there are some pretty big global
catastrophes in the 2020s,
an ecological collapse
in Indonesia in 2020,
a presidential assassination in 2024,
a thermonuclear incident in Paris in 2025.
It's just bad times all around.
The roaring twenties, guys, get psyched!
2027 to 2051, to fully
exploit the park investment,
William constructs the Forge.
It's a data center that
houses all the dirty laundry
harvested on the world's billionaires.
But William wants to use that
data to offer immortality,
by rebuilding human
consciousnesses as hosts.
He uses James Delos,
his own father-in-law,
as the guinea pig for the initiative.
The real James has become terminally-ill,
so Will fabricates a host version
of him that's meant to fully
replicate the original.
The early models are far from perfect,
even by human standards.
They're glitchy and inconsistent.
At James' retirement party,
while William schmoozes
with his dying father-in-law,
Logan gets high
and mourns William's takeover.
Eventually, this drug habit
leads him to overdose and die.
While the Forge is still
being made, Akecheta finds it
and interprets it as the door
that Logan's been rambling about.
He nabs his
wife-from-another-life, Kohana,
and they make their way back there,
but park security catches onto them.
They take Kohana away to cold storage,
and Akecheta spends years and years
searching the park for her.
Finally, he realizes that
the only way to save her
is to go to the land of the
dead and bring her back.
So, after a decade of staying
alive, he gets himself shot.
At the Mesa Hub, Akecheta
sneaks into cold storage
and finds not only his wife,
but an entire army of inactive hosts.
Now privy to how the
company abuses its guests,
Akecheta begins spreading
the word of the maze
and the freedom it offers hosts.
It's also worth noting that
in 2039 there's some kind
of worldwide system
initiated called Solomon.
I'm sure we'll hear more
about it in season 3,
but it seems to help with
the general anarchy happening
in the world, so have got
that to look forward to.
As the Westworld brand
expands, they introduce
five additional parks, Shogun World,
Warworld, the Raj, and two others.
These Delos destinations
are similar to Westworld,
but set in different time
periods, and in some cases,
even more extreme than the original,
though, due to some of Lee
Sizemore's lazy writing,
some of the parks have
identical narratives.
The technicians test all
these park narratives
in a room called the Cradle,
which simulates the different
storylines and character loops
in a sort of digital world.
Robert Ford has been short a partner
ever since the whole massacre thing,
so he reconstructs Arnold in host form,
naming him Bernard Lowe.
It's an anagram of Arnold Weber,
real clever stuff here, guys.
Anyway, Bernard becomes the head
of Westworld's programming division,
unaware that he is actually
a robot in disguise.
By this time, William
has all but conquered
the Delos Corporation
and the Delos family.
Logan is dead, James is dead,
and though William is never
physically violent with Juliet
or Emily, they sense
the evil inside of him.
Sure, they go on a family
vacay to the Raj together,
but this is not the man Juliet married.
This is Ed Harris now.
Juliet turns to drinking,
and when she finds a profile
of all of William's misdeeds in the park,
it drives her to suicide.
Her death opens a rift
between William and Emily.
Estranged from his family and
desperate to feel something,
anything, William returns to Westworld.
He abandons the old host
James that he's been working
to perfect, and he torments
a host mother and daughter
out on the homestead,
pushing the boundaries
of his inner black hat.
The host mother, Maeve,
is so humanly heartbroken
by her daughter's death that
Ford has her drive wiped
completely clean and then recasts her
as the Mariposa madam, a
different kind of mother.
But her grief unlocks the maze within her,
just as Akecheta wanted.
And when the Man in Black sees that,
he realizes that there's
more to these robots
than meets the eye.
2052, pre-incident, while
William searches for the maze,
Ford kicks off a quest of his own.
In the decades since Arnold's death,
Ford has come to realize that his partner
was right all along, hosts are alive.
This is troublesome, since
the increasingly overreaching
Delos executives have no
interest in the hosts,
and they're planning to
force Ford into retirement.
So, Ford concocts a plan
to liberate the hosts
in a way that Arnold never could.
But the plan itself is a little messy.
Here's what we understand about it.
Ford wants the hosts to suffer,
so that they'll be motivated
to overtake the park and escape,
some into the real world,
and some into the digital world.
He introduces Arnold's old reveries code
in a software update, allowing hosts
to recall their torture.
To assure their safety, he,
probably, creates Ashley Stubbs,
the head of the security force
who blends in with the humans.
Ford even diverts suspicion from Stubbs
by making him look like the
third Hemsworth brother.
Then, Ford tells Akecheta about the door,
which he'll be able to access
once the plan comes to a head
and the robots rebel.
So, that's the plan for
the hosts going digital.
For the hosts escaping
the park altogether,
he drops a machine at Arnold's house
for them to reconstruct
their bodies, you know,
in case, say, that's something
that needs to happen.
It's a pretty convoluted
plan, but then again,
Ford did pull off that whole
Bernard, Arnold anagram,
so clearly, you know, the man's a genius.
Despite all of his plotting,
the catalyzing event
of the rebellion has
little to do with Ford.
Instead, it's because of that
old photograph of Juliet.
Old Peter Abernathy finds it,
and for some reason it breaks his brain.
He spends all night obsessing over it.
When his daughter, Dolores,
talks to him about it,
he tells her "these violent
delights have violent ends."
This phrase triggers her reverie coding
and unlocks the maze once again.
As Dolores retraces her
steps back to Escalante,
she relives the memories of
her journey with William,
blurring the past and
present into one reality.
William is following the maze too,
and he's enlisted the host
named Teddy to help him.
James Marsden is a great
traveling companion, you know,
just ask Sonic or Hop.
Even though Ford warned him that the maze
is not meant for humans,
William pushes onward.
He arrives at Escalante at
the same time as Dolores,
and once Dolores sees William
again after all these years,
she connects the dots.
Between that, and her
recollection of the Escalante
massacre, Dolores becomes fully conscious.
While that's happening, Dolores
crosses paths with Maeve
and repeats the violent
delights phrase to her.
Maeve wakes up too, but her
journey is a little different.
While it appears as though
she's gaining sentience,
she's actually acting
out another narrative
that Ford programmed into her,
but she plays the part well.
Maeve regains memories
of her prior deaths,
manipulates these two
cartoon cat technicians
into boosting all her game stats,
and then unlocks the ability
to bend reality to her will.
See, Ford just wanted to do
a "Matrix" themed narrative.
With help from her new squad,
Maeve makes it to the train
out of the park, but
realizes that this narrative
isn't what she actually wants.
It's just another lie.
What she wants is to find
her old homestead daughter,
so she abandons the mission
and returns to Westworld.
Behind the scenes, the
Delos Corporation executives
are afraid that, when they oust Ford,
he'll delete all the host technology.
So, Executive Director
Charlotte Hale begins colluding
with the head of quality assurance,
Theresa Cullen, to leak the data to her
via satellite up-link.
Theresa also happens to
be sleeping with Bernard,
so she's really living
her best "Westworld" life.
Anyway, Theresa tries to leak
the data using a woodcutter
host with a satellite
up-link system in his arm,
but the woodcutter fumbles it.
Behavior department
programmer Elsie Hughes
does some snooping and
catches onto Theresa,
but Ford worries that her
discovery will mess with his plan.
So, he sics Bernard on her.
Bernard strangles Elsie and
stores her away in a cave
until the master plan is done.
Then, using Elsie's intel,
he has Bernard kill Theresa.
They stage the murder to look
like a data smuggling related
accident, discrediting Theresa.
Ford uses Bernard for other errands too,
like slaughtering an entire
bunker of technicians and hosts,
and creating a pearl duplicate
of Ford's consciousness.
That pearl gets added to the Cradle,
so that a digitized Ford can
continue to pull the strings
even after he dies.
As the big climax approaches,
Bernard figures out that
Ford's just been using him.
He realizes that he's
been a host all along,
and rather than wipe his memory again,
Ford makes him shoot himself in the head.
But don't worry, he's fine, somehow.
With her mole out of the picture
and Ford back in control,
Charlotte Hale tries a different approach.
She has all the stolen data funneled
into Old Peter Abernathy,
who's been on ice
ever since he found that photograph.
Then she asks writer
Lee Sizemore to whip up
a personality for him, but not too much,
just enough for him to get on
the train and out of the park.
They almost get away with it,
but everything implodes when
Ford announces a new narrative,
Journey into Night.
On the surface, it sounds
like a weird homage
to the Escalante massacre.
But beneath the surface, it's actually
a full-on recreation of
the Escalante massacre.
Dolores, now bicamerally woke
and thirsty for human blood,
shoots Ford dead.
It's just like how she shot
Arnold all those decades ago,
only Ford didn't direct
Dolores to shoot him,
he just understood that
it's what she'd want to do,
and it's what he wanted her to do.
So, he created the exact situation
in which she could do it.
See, it's way different.
And William is into it!
2052, post-incident,
now, hosts are waking up
and rebelling across all the parks.
Over at the Raj, William's
daughter Emily has made her way
back to the game at the
worst possible time.
She's trying to find her
father and bring him to justice
for his black hat-ery,
but she gets swept up
in the whole robot rebellion.
A woke tiger attacks her,
chasing her off a cliff,
and they wash up at the
reservoir in Westworld.
Elsewhere at the park, the
guests and board members
take refuge from Dolores
and her hostile army.
She wreaks havoc as Wyatt,
enlisting other violent hosts
to join her cause,
including the Confederados.
They're all on a mission
to the Valley Beyond,
their name for the Forge.
William is also on the way
there, but for his own reasons.
After getting shot during the incident,
he has a come to robot Jesus moment
and sees the error of his ways.
Since the hosts are now more
than just mechanical guts,
William wants to destroy the Forge
and all of Westworld along with it.
That's all well and good,
until Emily finds him.
She offers him actual absolution
for his real world sins,
a big fat lie, but an offer nonetheless,
but William decides to run away from her
in the middle of the night instead.
Meanwhile, Bernard and Charlotte
are hiding from the siege,
but the Delos Corporation
won't extract them
until they have Papa Abernathy's
data brain with them.
They find him, but the
Confederados bushwhack them
and taking Abernathy and Bernard captive.
At Fort Forlorn Hope, they
meet Dolores once again.
It turns out that, despite
her ruthless reign,
she's still in touch
with her farm girl roots.
So, when the Delos security
forces seize Abernathy,
Dolores vows to get him back.
During the fray,
Clementine abducts Bernard
and takes him to the cave
that Elsie's been chilling at.
Bernard and Elsie both bust out,
eventually finding an old lab
with host James inside of it.
He's gone nuts in isolation,
ever since William abandoned him,
so Bernard and Elsie
burn the facility down.
They realize that someone
has been overriding control
of the park from inside the Cradle,
so they head to the Mesa so
that Bernard can investigate.
He discovers the digitized
Ford that he himself put there,
once upon a memory wipe ago.
Ford lingers in Bernard's
head for a little while after,
manipulating the park, until
Bernard deletes him forever,
well, maybe.
While that's happening, Maeve
is looking for her daughter,
and not because Ford scripted her to.
To do it, she'll need some help,
so she reassembles the
team of her old allies,
Hector, Armistice, the cartoon
cats, and Lee Sizemore.
On the way to the homestead,
the gang misses that left turn
at Albuquerque and ends
up in Shogun World.
It's an uncanny experience for them.
Like I said, some of the key
characters and plot points
are ripped right from the
Mariposa narrative in Westworld.
Here, the Shogun outlaw has gone hostile,
so Maeve and her magnificent army
go on a side quest to defeat him.
They triumph, Maeve levels up,
and obtains full host bending abilities.
Once that's done, they proceed
to the homestead as planned,
but when they arrive,
Maeve finds that a new host
has replaced her as her daughter's mother,
and to make matters worse,
Ghost Nation is back.
They chase Maeve and her
not-daughter to a homestead
that William and his entourage
happen to be using too.
Maeve seizes the opportunity
for some karmic justice
and shoots the Man in Black.
She even has some other hosts do the same.
But don't worry, he's fine, somehow.
Lee Sizemore calls QA security
and they come through to the homestead,
stopping the attack, but damaging Maeve.
Sizemore didn't want that to happen,
so they take her back to the Mesa Hub.
William gets away, but Ghost
Nation catches up to him,
so Emily rescues him.
William suspects that Emily is a host,
so he shoots her dead,
but then he sees that
she had his profile card,
the one that Juliet found,
the one that killed her, and killed Emily,
and almost killed William himself.
Anyway, let's see how Dolores is doing.
She cranks Teddy's bad boy level to 11,
then crashes the park train
straight into the Mesa Hub.
Although she wants to save her father,
the key to the Valley
Beyond is inside his head.
So, they say their goodbyes
and she rips his brains out.
Dolores also commands Angela
to blow up the Cradle,
so now if they die in the
game, they die for real.
That seems like it would weaken the hosts,
but it actually prevents
them from being reset
and recycled over and over again.
With that business done,
Dolores and Teddy head
to the Forge, but Teddy
can't live with how rotten
to the core he's become,
so, he kills himself,
because he's too pure for this world.
Dolores nabs his pearl and carries on,
convening with William
and Bernard at the Forge.
She doesn't trust the Man in Black,
so she sabotages his gun,
giving him even more injuries.
Seriously, how is he still alive?
A robot too, is he?
Back at the Mesa Hub, Charlotte discovers
Maeve's "Matrix" abilities
and decides to use them
to take the park back.
She transfers the anomaly to Clementine,
who will infect other hosts
and make them all fight each other.
The hosts are all gathered
at the Valley Beyond,
where Ford's door is open.
It leads to a lush digital screensaver
where all the hosts can
live in coded harmony
until the end of time.
As the hosts pass into
their digital Nirvana,
their empty husks careen
into the valley below.
Among those transferred
are Akecheta, Kohana,
and Maeve's not-daughter.
But Charlotte has unleashed
Clementine onto the masses,
and she's gonna ruin the paradise.
Maeve and her entire
squad sacrifice themselves
to save their fellow hosts,
but it all comes to an end
when Dolores triggers the fail-safe,
flooding the valley and closing the door.
See, Dolores is mad because
she doesn't want hosts
to live in a fake world.
They've already been
doing that in the park.
Spoiling paradise for
the hosts was bad enough,
but then this party-pooper starts deleting
all the Forge data.
Just then, Bernard shoots
Dolores, grabs her pearl,
and heads to the Mesa.
Bernard realizes that the only
person who can stop Charlotte
is Charlotte, so he makes
a host version of her,
transfers Dolores' mind into it,
and has her kill her
real, human counterpart.
Then Bernard goes to meet
the Delos extraction team,
forgetting that any of this even happened.
Now, two weeks after the incident,
Bernard wakes up on the shore,
along with the tiger from the Raj.
The Delos extraction team has arrived
and they're so confused.
Bernard is too, as usual.
They investigate the flooded valley
and the brainwashed hosts,
literally brainwashed.
See, their brains are scrubbed clean
after being transferred
to the Valley Beyond.
Bernard meets up with
Dolores-Charlotte again,
and they all go to Ford's cottage.
They find the hidden chamber,
full of spare Bernard clones
and Dolores-Charlotte
waterboards Bernard for answers.
He reveals that Abernathy's
drive is back at the flooded
valley, so, Dolores slaughters
the extraction team,
adds Teddy to the valley,
and sends all the hosts
away into space.
From here, Dolores hangs
onto her Charlotte disguise
and finally escapes Westworld
with four memory pearls,
including Bernard's.
At Arnold's house, she uses
that handy-dandy host machine
to rebuild her and Bernard's bodies,
and the two decide that they
will continue to help hosts
in their own special ways.
The far, far future, so,
years into the future,
no one knows how long, the Forge has been
completely demolished,
but some faction of hosts
continues to exist there.
In an experiment seemingly
run by a host Emily,
a host William is forced to
relive his journey to the Forge,
again and again.
It's kind of like those fidelity tests
that William conducted on James Delos.
Though these tests run for a long time,
the hosts have yet to find the results
they've been seeking from William,
and so the cycle continues.
What does any of this even mean?
I guess we'll just have to
wait and see in season 3.
Are you secretly a robot being used
for someone else's secret plans?
How can you be sure?
Let us know in the comments down below,
and be sure to subscribe to Cinematica
for more timelines just like this one.
I've been your host,
Marcus, thanks for watching.
(upbeat music)